A ruby is a pink to blood-red colored gemstone, a variety of the mineral corundum (aluminium oxide). 
The red color is caused mainly by the presence of the element chromium. Its name comes from ruber, 
Latin for red. Other varieties of gem-quality corundum are called sapphires. The ruby is considered 
one of the four precious stones, together with the sapphire, the emerald, and the diamond.[1]

Prices of rubies are primarily determined by color. The brightest and most valuable "red" called 
pigeon blood-red, commands a huge premium over other rubies of similar quality. After color follows 
clarity: similar to diamonds, a clear stone will command a premium, but a ruby without any needle-like 
rutile inclusions may indicate that the stone has been treated. Cut and carat (weight) are also an 
important factor in determining the price.

Rubies have a hardness of 9.0 on the Mohs scale of mineral hardness. Among the natural gems only 
moissanite and diamond are harder, with diamond having a Mohs hardness of 10.0 and moissonite 
falling somewhere in between corundum (ruby) and diamond in hardness. Ruby is α-alumina (the most 
stable form of Al2O3) in which a small fraction of the aluminum3+ ions are replaced by chromium3+ 
ions. Each Cr3+ is surrounded octahedrally by six O2- ions. This crystallographic arrangement 
strongly affects each Cr3+, resulting in light absorption in the yellow-green region of the spectrum 
and thus in the red color of the gem. When yellow-green light is absorbed by Cr3+, it is re-emitted 
as red luminescence.[2] This red emission adds to the red color perceived by the subtraction of green 
and violet light from white light, and adds luster to the gem's appearance. When the optical 
arrangement is such that the emission is stimulated by 694-nanometer photons reflecting back and 
forth between two mirrors, the emission grows strongly in intensity. This effect was used by Theodore 
Maiman in 1960 to make the first successful laser, based on ruby.

All natural rubies have imperfections in them, including color impurities and inclusions of rutile 
needles known as "silk". Gemologists use these needle inclusions found in natural rubies to distinguish 
them from synthetics, simulants, or substitutes. Usually the rough stone is heated before cutting. 
Almost all rubies today are treated in some form, with heat treatment being the most common practice. 
However, rubies that are completely untreated but still of excellent quality command a large premium.

Some rubies show a 3-point or 6-point asterism or "star". These rubies are cut into cabochons to display 
the effect properly. Asterisms are best visible with a single-light source, and move across the stone as 
the light moves or the stone is rotated. Such effects occur when light is reflected off the "silk" (the 
structurally oriented rutile needle inclusions) in a certain way. This is one example where inclusions 
increase the value of a gemstone. Furthermore, rubies can show color changes — though this occurs very 
rarely — as well as chatoyancy or the "cat's eye" effect.
Color

Generally, gemstone-quality corundum in all shades of red, including pink, are called rubies.[3][4] 
However, in the United States, a minimum color saturation must be met to be called a ruby, otherwise 
the stone will be called a pink sapphire.[3] This distinction between rubies and pink sapphires is 
relatively new, having arisen sometime in the 20th century. If a distinction is made, the line 
separating a ruby from a pink sapphire is not clear and highly debated.[5] As a result of the 
difficulty and subjectiveness of such distinctions, trade organizations such as the International 
Colored Gemstone Association (ICA) have adopted the broader definition for ruby which encompasses its 
lighter shades, including pink.[6][7]
Natural occurrence

The Mogok Valley in Upper Myanmar (Burma) was for centuries the world's main source for rubies. That 
region has produced some of the finest rubies ever mined, but in recent years very few good rubies 
have been found there. The very best color in Myanmar rubies is sometimes described as "pigeon's 
blood." In central Myanmar, the area of Mong Hsu began producing rubies during the 1990s and rapidly 
became the world's main ruby mining area. The most recently found ruby deposit in Myanmar is in Namya 
(Namyazeik) located in the northern state of Kachin.

Rubies have historically been mined in Thailand, the Pailin and Samlout District of Cambodia, Burma, 
India, Afghanistan and in Pakistan. In Sri Lanka, lighter shades of rubies (often "pink sapphires") 
are more commonly found. After the Second World War ruby deposits were found in Tanzania, Madagascar, 
Vietnam, Nepal, Tajikistan, and Pakistan.

A few rubies have been found in the U.S. states of Montana, North Carolina, South Carolina and Wyoming. 
While searching for aluminous schists in Wyoming, geologist Dan Hausel noted an association of vermiculite 
with ruby and sapphire and located six previously undocumented deposits.[8]

More recently, large ruby deposits have been found under the receding ice shelf of Greenland.

In 2002 rubies were found in the Waseges River area of Kenya. There are reports of a large deposit of rubies 
found in 2009 in Mozambique, in Nanhumbir in the Cabo Delgado district of Montepuez.[9]

Spinel, another red gemstone, is sometimes found along with rubies in the same gem gravel or marble. Red 
spinel may be mistaken for ruby by those lacking experience with gems. However, the finest red spinels 
can have a value approaching that of the average ruby.
